IN THE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS AUTHORITY
CHRISTCHURCH

ATTENTION IS DRAWN TO
THE ORDER PROHIBITING
PUBLICATION OF CERTAIN
INFORMATION
REFERRED
TO IN THIS DETERMINATION

I TE RATONGA AHUMANA TAIMAHI
ŌTAUTAHI ROHE

[2019] NZERA 7
3030151
BETWEEN

LABOUR INSPECTOR
Applicant

AND

MALCOLM BENNETT AND
CLAIRE BENNETT
Respondent

Member of Authority:

David Appleton

Representatives:

Ella Tait, for Applicant
Gareth Abdinor and Grace Moore, Co-Counsel for
respondents

Investigation Meeting:

25 October 2018 at Christchurch

Submissions
Received:

and

Information 19 November and 3 December 2018 from Applicant
6 and 26 November 2018 from Respondent

Determination:

9 January 2019

DETERMINATION OF THE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS AUTHORITY

Prohibition from publication order
[1]

Mr and Mrs Bennett put before the Authority a statement of personal assets and

liabilities, and the trading accounts, profit and loss account and a balance sheet for the
business of the Coalgate Tavern. The contents of these statements, and the evidence given by

the Bennetts about their financial situation, are confidential and I prohibit from publication all
details contained in these statements and their evidence.
Employment Relationship Problem
[2]

The Labour Inspector (Eva Belley) originally sought the payment of arrears of final

holiday pay, plus interest, to two former employees of the respondents, an order for the
reinstatement of annual holiday entitlements to all employees of the respondents and the
imposition of penalties against the respondents for breaches of various sections of the
Holidays Act 2003.
[3]

In her statement of problem the Labour Inspector sought the payment of arrears of

holiday pay in the sum of $15,508.45 for Ms Zanthe Pont, and $6,176.78 for Ms Marion
Karst. At the time of the investigation meeting the respondents had already made payments to
the Labour Inspectorate for Ms Pont and Ms Karst of additional sums in respect of sick pay,
public holiday pay and alternative holiday pay. Since the Authority’s investigation meeting
the respondents have paid the arrears of holiday pay sought on behalf of Ms Pont and Ms
Karst. There are therefore no outstanding arrears owed in respect of these individuals.
[4]

Since the investigation meeting the respondents have also agreed to reinstate all

accrued annual holidays for all of their existing employees. This is despite the fact that the
Labour Inspectorate’s claim for an order in this respect was deficient, casting doubt on the
jurisdiction of the Authority to make the compliance order sought.
[5]

The Labour Inspector did not originally seek payment of arrears of final holiday pay,

sick pay and alternative holiday with respect of a third employee, Ms Alice Greenwood,
because the latter had initially wanted her name to be kept confidential. However, Ms
Greenwood subsequently changed her position after she had left the employment of the
respondents. At the end of the investigation meeting, Ms Belley stated that she believed that
arrears of pay should be awarded to Ms Greenwood too.
[6]

Accordingly, it was suggested by Ms Tait that, given that the Labour Inspector had not

sought arrears for Ms Greenwood in the statement of problem, any arrears found owing to her
should be funded out of any penalties imposed upon the respondents. Mr Abdinor did not

2

object to this approach, and it was agreed that further submissions would be made on the issue
after Ms Belley had calculated the arrears.
[7]

Ms Belley has subsequently calculated the arrears owing to Ms Greenwood as

comprising $7,653.56 final holiday arrears, 12 days’ sick pay in the sum of $1,441.05 and
alternative holiday arrears in the sum of $534.30.
[8]

I am treating the written submissions by Ms Tait as an application to amend the

statement of problem to include a claim for total arrears of pay for Ms Greenwood in the sum
of $9,628.91. I grant leave to amend the statement of problem in that way. The respondents
have not challenged Ms Belley’s calculation, nor denied that Ms Greenwood is owed that
sum. However, the respondents do resist the imposition of penalties.
Brief account of the facts
[9]

Mr and Mrs Bennett own and operate the Coalgate Tavern in Coalgate, in the Selwyn

District of Canterbury. They have done so for over 30 years.
[10]

Up until the Labour Inspector’s intervention, Mr and Mrs Bennett had always treated

their employees as casual employees. This belief was based on the ability of the staff to pick
up and drop shifts, swapping with each other, as they wished. However, the respondents now
accept that, in law, the majority of their employees were permanent part-time staff. Having
read the evidence of three former members of staff named below, and having reviewed their
days and hours of work, I agree that those three staff, at least, were not casual employees.
[11]

Ms Belley received a complaint from Ms Greenwood on 16 January 2018 to the effect

that the employees of the respondents were treated as casuals and so were not provided with
annual holidays or sick leave, and that alternative holiday entitlements were paid out
automatically without the employees having the ability to take a paid day off.
[12]

Ms Karst then contacted the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment about

the same matter. Ms Belley was then referred to Ms Pont, who had left the employment of
the respondents due to not being allowed to accrue holiday pay.

3

[13]

Ms Belley visited the respondents in February 2018 and gathered together pay records.

She also spoke to two then current employees about their employment arrangements. The
emerging theme from these two employees was that paid sick pay and bereavement leave
were not given and that holiday pay was included in the wages.
[14]

Ms Belley says that all employees received an 8% holiday pay component with their

regular wages, in accordance with a clause in their employment agreements. However, the
8% was not shown as an identifiable component on their payslips or in the PAYE books that
were kept by the Bennetts. The Bennetts did not dispute paying 8% with their employees’
regular pay, stating that this was the practice in the hospitality industry and that those were
the conditions that the employees had signed up to in their employment agreements.
[15]

Ms Belley says that, out of the 17 employees she identified, there were 15 who were

not casual employees and who should have received four weeks annual holiday entitlements,
based on their work pattern and length of service. She found a further two employees who
had not yet accrued 12 months of continuous employment, but whose work patterns showed
that they were permanent, and not casual employees. Those two employees were also being
incorrectly paid 8% holiday pay with their regular wages.
[16]

Ms Belley also found that, when an employee worked on a public holiday that was an

otherwise working day for them, although they received pay at a time-and-a-half rate, they
also got paid out for the accrued alternative holiday in the next pay cycle without being able
to take the day as a holiday.
[17]

Ms Belley says that Ms Karst, Ms Pont and Ms Greenwood all stated that they had

always understood that they were not entitled to be paid if they had a day off sick because of
their casual status, so they would swap shifts with someone else to cover for them. Mr and
Mrs Bennett, however, denied that they did not pay their employees if they were off sick and
said that, if an employee put down on their timesheet that they wanted sick pay, they would
get paid for it. If they did not, they would not get paid.
[18]

Ms Belley says that one employee told her that, if she could not turn up to work

because one of her children were ill, she would not be paid sick leave and that, when her

4

mother passed away, she did not take any time off due to the financial pressure as she knew
she would not get paid bereavement leave.
[19]

In Ms Pont’s statement of evidence she said that, in ten years of employment, she was

only paid one day of sick pay when she was sent home unwell from work. She gave an
example of an occasion when she had a medical certificate which stated that she was unfit for
work for two days, but that, when she showed it to Mr and Mrs Bennett, they told her that if
she did not come to work she would not get paid as she was not entitled to sick leave. She
therefore worked those days, despite being signed off as unfit to work. She said that, on
another occasion, she provided a medical certificate that she was unfit to work and did not get
paid for those days.
[20]

Ms Belley said in her evidence that, having reviewed the respondents’ PAYE books,

she found that paid sick leave had been provided on only four occasions over 15 employees
between October 2013 and January 2018. She is therefore of the opinion, given the evidence
of the employees, and former employees she had spoken to, that the employers did not have a
practice of providing sick day entitlements to their employees.
[21]

Mr and Mrs Bennett’s evidence is that they believed their staff were truly casual

employees and that they had never intended to disadvantage any of them. They said that they
believed that their employees were benefiting through being treated as casuals as they always
got paid 8% holiday pay with their wages, and were able to work flexible shifts. The
respondents say that they only found out that they had been incorrectly treating their
employees as casuals when Ms Belley advised them as such. They then quickly afterwards
engaged a payroll company to help them pay their employees correctly and to record holiday
entitlements.
[22]

The Bennetts deny that they ever told their staff that if they did not work they would

not get paid, and say that Ms Pont only had one paid sick day because that was all they were
aware of. They deny that they received a medical certificate from Ms Pont on the occasion
she worked. Ms Pont did say in evidence that she believed she may not have given a copy to
the Bennetts, but had it in her hand when she spoke to them about her illness.

5

[23]

The Bennetts dispute that they refused to allow an employee to take bereavement

leave or that they told the employees that they would not get paid if they did not work. They
say that they relied on their employees to note their hours correctly on their timesheets, and
advised them that they needed to write “S” on their timesheets if they had been sick.
[24]

Mrs Bennett says that she and her husband met with Ms Belley and another Labour

Inspector on 15 March 2018 and, when the other Labour Inspector asked Ms Belley if she was
going to seek penalties, Ms Belley said “No, not at all”. She says that they did not expect to
see penalties being sought because of that conversation. The oral evidence of Mr Bennett was
somewhat different in that he said that Ms Belley had replied to the question by saying “I
don’t think so, I’ll have to think about it”.
[25]

Ms Belley’s evidence was that she would not have said that they would not seek

penalties as the Labour Inspectorate’s processes would not have allowed her to say that. She
says that she had indicated that she would have to think about whether to impose penalties.
She also says that the other Labour Inspector had actually said that, if the matter went before
the Authority, it is likely that the Authority would view the matter as less serious, and that a
lower penalty would be imposed. Ms Belley, however, also said in evidence that she did not
view the matter as ‘less serious’.
[26]

The Bennetts say that they have been in the hospitality industry for almost 40 years

and now wish to retire (they are both in their 70s). They say that they are in a modest
financial position and that the investment that they have in the business was intended to be
used so that they would be able to retire. They say that the penalties that have been sought
would cause major hardship to their financial situation.
Issues
[27]

The Authority has to determine whether penalties be imposed upon the respondents for

breaches of ss 16, 28, 63 and 81 of the Holidays Act and, if so, whether $9,628.91 of that
penalty should be paid to the Labour Inspectorate to be paid to Ms Greenwood.

6

[28]

In addition, the Authority needs to determine whether interest should be awarded on

the arrears of sick leave, alternative holiday and unworked holiday arrears originally claimed
on behalf of Ms Pont and Ms Karst.
Should penalties be imposed upon the Bennetts?
[29]

The Labour Inspector seeks penalties under s 75 of the Holidays Act in relation to four

sets of breaches, as follows:
(a)

A failure to provide to 12 employees an entitlement to four weeks of paid
annual holidays contrary to s 16 of the Holidays Act;

(b)

For incorrectly paying to two employees with less than 12 months continuous
employment 8% of their gross wages with their regular wages contrary to s 28
of the Holidays Act;

(c)

For failing to provide sick leave entitlements to 15 current and former
employees contrary to s 63 of the Holidays Act; and

(d)

For failing to record sick leave entitlements in respect of 19 employees
contrary to s 81 of the Holidays Act, although the Labour Inspectorate now
only treats this as one breach.

[30]

The respondents argue that no penalties should be imposed because of the alleged

representation by the Labour Inspectors that no penalties would be sought. They have also
paid all of the arrears claimed. On balance, I do not accept that any binding promise was
given by either Ms Belley or her colleague that penalties would not be sought. I prefer the
evidence of Ms Belley in this respect. Whilst I suspect that she and her colleague were
attempting to comfort the respondents by downplaying the extent of any penalties that may be
imposed, the circumstances of the respondents’ breaches do not suggest that the Labour
Inspectors, both of whom are experienced, would have (or even could have) waived the
Labour Inspectorate’s right to seek penalties.
[31]

As I discuss below, the breaches of minimum employment legislation committed by

the respondents occurred over a significant period of time and were only corrected when the
Labour Inspectorate intervened. The respondents had opportunities to address some of the

7

breaches before that intervention, but either chose not to, or recklessly shut their eyes to their
obligations to their employees.

I am quite satisfied that the imposition of penalties is

warranted.
[32]

Sections 63, 75 and 81 of the Holidays Act provide as follows:
63 Entitlement to sick leave and bereavement leave
(1) An employee is entitled to sick leave and bereavement leave in
accordance with this subpart—
(a) after the employee has completed 6 months’ current continuous
employment with the employer; or
(b) if, in the case of an employee to whom subsection (1)(a) does not
apply, the employee has, over a period of 6 months, worked for the
employer for—
(i) at least an average of 10 hours a week during that period;
and
(ii) no less than 1 hour in every week during that period or
no less than 40 hours in every month during that period.
(2) Sick leave and bereavement leave must be provided—
(a) to an employee to whom subsection (1)(a) applies, for—
(i) the 12-month period of continuous employment
beginning at the end of the 6-month period specified in that
subsection; and
(ii) each subsequent 12 months of current continuous
employment:
(b) to an employee to whom subsection (1)(b) applies, for—
(i) the 12-month period of employment beginning at the end
of the 6-month period specified in that subsection; and
(ii) each subsequent 12-month period of employment as long
as the circumstances referred to in subparagraphs (i) and (ii)
of that subsection continue to apply.
(3) However, an employer and employee may agree that—
(a) the employee may take sick leave or bereavement leave in
advance; and
(b) in the case of sick leave taken in advance, the amount of leave
taken is to be deducted from the employee’s entitlement under this
section.

8

75 Penalty for non-compliance
(1) An employer who fails to comply with any of the provisions listed in
subsection (2), and every person who is involved in the failure to comply, is
liable,—
(a) if the employer is an individual, to a penalty not exceeding
$10,000:
(b) if the employer is a company or other body corporate, to a
penalty not exceeding $20,000.
(2) The provisions are—
(a) section 16 and sections 21 to 28 (which relate to an employee’s
entitlement to, and payment for, annual holidays):
(b) section 40(3) (which relates to an employee’s entitlement to be
paid for a public holiday that would have occurred during the
employee’s annual holidays):
(ba) sections 28A and 28B (which relate to a request by an employee
for a portion of his or her annual holidays to be paid out and
payment for that portion):
(c) section 46, sections 49 to 56, section 60, and section 61(3)
(which relate to an employee’s entitlement to, and payment for,
public holidays and alternative holidays):
(d) section 63, section 65, and sections 69 to 72 (which relate to an
employee’s entitlement to, and payment for, sick leave and
bereavement leave):
(e) section 81 (which relates to an employer’s obligation to keep a
holiday and leave record):
(f) section 82 (which relates to requests for access to a holiday and
leave record).
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), a person is involved in a failure to
comply if the person would be treated as a person involved in a breach
within the meaning of section 142W of the Employment Relations Act 2000.
81 Holiday and leave record
(1) [Repealed]
(2) An employer must at all times keep a holiday and leave record showing,
in the case of each employee employed by the employer, the following
information:
(a) the name of the employee:
(b) the date on which the employee’s employment commenced:

9

(c) the number of hours worked each day in a pay period and the pay
for those hours:
(d) the employee’s current entitlement to annual holidays:
(e) the date on which the employee last became entitled to annual
holidays:
(f) the employee’s current entitlement to sick leave:
(g) the dates on which any annual holiday, sick leave, or
bereavement leave has been taken:
(h) the amount of payment for any annual holiday, sick leave, or
bereavement leave that has been taken:
(ha) the portion of any annual holidays that have been paid out in
each entitlement year (if applicable):
(hb) the date and amount of payment, in each entitlement year, for
any annual holidays paid out under section 28B (if applicable):
(i) the dates of, and payments for, any public holiday on
which the employee worked:
(j) the number of hours that the employee worked on any public
holiday:
(ja) the day or part of any public holiday specified in section 44(1)
agreed to be transferred under section 44A or 44B and the calendar
day or period of 24 hours to which it has been transferred (if
applicable):
(k) the date on which the employee became entitled to any alternative
holiday:
(l) the details of the dates of, and payments for, any public holiday or
alternative holiday on which the employee did not work, but for which the
employee had an entitlement to holiday pay:
(m) the cash value of any board or lodgings, as agreed or determined under
section 10:
(n) the details of any payment to which the employee is entitled under
section 61(3) (which relates to payment in exchange for an alternative
holiday):
(o) the date of the termination of the employee’s employment (if applicable):
(p) the amount paid to the employee as holiday pay upon the termination of
the employee’s employment (if applicable):
(q) any other particulars that may be prescribed.

10

(3) The holiday and leave record must be kept—
(a) in written form; or
(b) in a form or in a manner that allows the information in the record to be
easily accessed and converted into written form.
(3A) If an employee’s number of hours worked each day in a pay period and the pay
for those hours are agreed and the employee works those hours (the usual hours), it
is sufficient compliance with subsection (2)(c) if those usual hours and pay are stated
in—
(a) the employee’s wages and time record kept under section 130 of the
Employment Relations Act 2000; or
(b) the employee’s employment agreement; or
(c) a roster or any other document or record used in the normal course of the
employee’s employment.
(3B) In subsection (3A), the usual hours of an employee who is remunerated by
way of salary include any additional hours worked by the employee in accordance
with the employee’s employment agreement.
(3C) Despite subsection (3B), the employer must record any additional hours worked
that need to be recorded to enable the employer to comply with the employer’s
general obligation under section 4B(1) of the Employment Relations Act 2000.
(4) Information entered in the holiday and leave record must be kept for not less than
6 years after the date on which the information is entered.
(5) The holiday and leave record may be kept so as to form part of the wages and
time record required to be kept under section 130 of the Employment Relations Act
2000.

[33]

Section 76A of the Holidays Act sets out the matters which the Authority must have

regard to in determining the amount of a penalty, being:
(a)

The purpose stated in s 3 of the Holidays Act and, to the extent relevant, the
object stated in s 3 of the Act; and

(b)
[34]

The matters referred to in s 133A(b) to (g) of the Act.

Section 3 of the Holidays Act provides:
3 Purpose
The purpose of this Act is to promote balance between work and other
aspects of employees’ lives and, to that end, to provide employees with
minimum entitlements to—

11

(a) annual holidays to provide the opportunity for rest and recreation:
(b) public holidays for the observance of days of national, religious, or
cultural significance:
(c) sick leave to assist employees who are unable to attend work because
they are sick or injured, or because someone who depends on the employee
for care is sick or injured:
(d) bereavement leave to assist employees who are unable to attend work
because they have suffered a bereavement.

[35]

Sub-sections 133A(b) to (g) of the Act provide as follows:
(b) the nature and extent of the breach or involvement in the breach; and
(c) whether the breach was intentional, inadvertent, or negligent; and
(d) the nature and extent of any loss or damage suffered by any person, or
gains made or losses avoided by the person in breach or the person involved
in the breach, because of the breach or involvement in the breach; and
(e) whether the person in breach or the person involved in the breach has
paid an amount of compensation, reparation, or restitution, or has taken other
steps to avoid or mitigate any actual or potential adverse effects of the
breach; and
(f) the circumstances in which the breach, or involvement in the breach, took
place, including the vulnerability of the employee; and
(g) whether the person in breach or the person involved in the breach has
previously been found by the Authority or the court in proceedings under
this Act, or any other enactment, to have engaged in any similar conduct.

[36]

These factors set out in s.133A were incorporated in the guidance contained in the

judgment of the Employment Court in Jeanie May Borsboom (Labour Inspector) v Preet Pvt
Limited and Warrington Discount Tobacco Limited1.

The guidance set out by the

Employment Court in the Preet judgment is now well known, involving four steps.
Step one
[37]

Step one involves identifying the number of breaches relevant to the fixing of the

penalties and whether or not breaches should be “globalised”.
[38]

In this case, it would also be necessary to consider whether Mr and Mrs Bennett are

each liable to pay penalties of $10,000 in respect of each breach, or whether, as trading
1

[2016] NZEmpC 143.

12

partners, they should attract just one penalty per breach jointly. The Labour Inspectorate has
decided that, in this case, it seeks one penalty per breach against both respondents jointly, and
not individually. Ms Tait makes clear that this does not reflect a general practice of the
Labour Inspectorate in terms of trading partners. However, I accept it as a reasonable
approach to take in this case given that Mrs Bennett did not take any particularly active part in
the granting, recording or payment of holiday and leave.
Ms Belley originally argued that there were 48 breaches, and that they should not be
globalised. The Bennetts do not dispute the analysis of Ms Belley in respect of the number of
affected employees. However, in her written submissions, Ms Tait said that they were
treating the breach of s 81 as a single breach rather than as 19 breaches.
Breach of s 16 of the Holidays Act in respect of 12 staff
[39]

I agree that the penalties should not be globalised in respect of these breaches, as each

employee will have been personally affected by them in her own way. To globalise the
penalties across the 12 employees would be to ignore the very real and personal effect on
each. Therefore, the starting point for penalties in respect of this set of breaches is $120,000.
Breach of s 28 of the Holidays Act
[40]

These breaches relate to two employees with less than a year’s service each, and who

therefore were not entitled to holiday pay under s 16. However, as above, the effect on the
two was likely to be different and so, again, I decline to globalise. The starting point for this
set of breaches is therefore $20,000.
Breach of s 63 Holidays Act
[41]

There is a dispute between the parties as to whether paid sick leave was provided or

not. I am clear that the employees thought that they were not entitled to it. I believe that the
Bennetts were sincere in their evidence that sick leave was paid if it was recorded on a
timesheet by the employee, but this rule was far too narrow, and does not reflect the
requirements of the Holidays Act. Section 65 makes clear that an employee may take sick
leave if she, her spouse or partner or a dependant is sick or injured. She is entitled to 5 days’

13

sick leave for each 12 month period of continuous employment starting at the end of the first
six months, and for each subsequent 12 months of continuous employment.
[42]

Therefore, the entitlement is not dependent upon the employee marking her sickness

on a timesheet. I am satisfied that the Bennetts failed to pay sick leave when they knew that
employees were sick. This was because of their rule, which was unlawful. They benefitted
from the continued ignorance of their employees.
[43]

Again, these breaches affected each employee in her own way, and it would not be

appropriate to globalise across the employees. The starting point is therefore a penalty of
$150,000.
Breach of s 81 of the Holidays Act
[44]

Section 81 makes clear that an employee’s current entitlement to sick leave had to be

recorded in a holiday and leave record. The Bennetts did not do that. This is likely to be
responsible for the misunderstanding amongst the employees that they were not entitled to
sick leave. The Labour Inspectorate now treats these failings as one breach. The starting
point is therefore a penalty of $10,000.
[45]

This makes a total of 30 breaches that are liable to be penalised, attracting a starting

point of $300,000.
Step two
[46]

At step two, the severity of the breach should then be assessed in each case. This

establishes the provisional starting point for each penalty, potentially up to the maximum, and
will include a separate adjustment for aggravating and mitigating factors respectively in
relation to each breach. Each penalty may be expressed as a dollar amount or a percentage of
the maximum.
Breach of s 16 of the Holidays Act
[47]

When I consider the evidence of the witnesses, including Mr and Mrs Bennett, it is my

finding that there was no intention to actively exploit or disadvantage the employees.

14

However, I do find that the Bennetts shut their eyes to their obligations as employers under
the Holidays Act. Whilst they could perhaps be forgiven for having always treated their staff
as casual employees in the absence of any reasonable indication to the contrary, once Ms Pont
started to query her right to accrue holidays, and asked Mr Bennett to help her in view of her
son starting school in the near future, the Bennetts should have made enquiries or taken
advice. This is especially so given that Ms Pont had referred in a conversation with Mrs
Bennett to information she had found on the internet about accruing holidays. I find Mrs
Pont’s evidence credible in that respect.
[48]

Mr Bennett did make some suggestions to help Ms Pont, but not about her right to take

paid holidays. I note also that Mr Bennett said in his oral evidence that he rolled up pay into
wages because it helped the cash flow of the business. That is different from saying he did it
because he was entitled to do so under s 28 of the Holidays Act.
[49]

I would assess this breach as moderately serious, given that it was a practice that had

been going on for a significant time. I would reduce the maximum penalties attributable to
this breach by 50%. That makes a total penalty of $60,000.
[50]

In terms of ameliorating factors, Ms Belley said that the Bennetts had co-operated with

her and had rectified the problems quickly by engaging a payroll provider to handle the pay
and leave accrual from then on. I believe that this deserves recognition, and will reduce the
penalty to $30,000 at this stage.
Breach of s 28 of the Holidays Act
[51]

A breach of s 28 overlaps with a breach of s 16, save that, in the case of these two

employees, they did not have 12 months’ service and so had not yet become eligible for rights
under that section. However, paying the two employees under s 28 when they were not
eligible meant that they were potentially deprived of accruing rights under s 16 once their 12
months’ employment had been reached.
[52]

My assessment of the seriousness of this breach is the same as my assessment of the

breach of s 16 above; moderately serious. I reduce the penalty total attributable to this breach

15

by 50%, to $10,000. I also reduce the penalty total further to acknowledge the Bennetts’ cooperative response to the Labour Inspector, to $5,000.
Breach of s 63 of the Holidays Act
[53]

My finding is that there was a breach of the Holidays Act by the rule imposed by the

Bennetts that sick pay was only payable if the timesheet was expressly marked with an “s”.
Not paying sick pay to staff is a serious matter, and hits at the very heart of the objective of
the sick pay provisions in the Holidays Act. It risks employees working when they are unfit,
or being deprived of income if they have no choice but to miss work.
[54]

It was disingenuous of the Bennetts to claim that the employees were told that they

could be paid sick pay if they would only have recorded their sick leave on their timesheets.
It is inconceivable that people on low wages would have voluntarily foregone paid sick leave
just to avoid writing an “s” on a timesheet.
[55]

I regard this as a serious breach and will fix the starting point at 80% of the maximum.

That makes $120,000.
[56]

Turning to ameliorating factors, the co-operative response of the Bennetts should be

recognised again by a 50% reduction. That leaves a total of $60,000.
Breach of s 81 of the Holidays Act
[57]

A failure to record sick leave entitlements has probably led to the misunderstanding

amongst the staff that they would not be paid for taking time off sick. If the Bennetts had
recorded their employees’ current entitlement to sick leave, the dates on which sick leave was
taken and the amount of payment for sick leave taken, as required by s 81, it is highly likely
in my view that the staff would have understood their rights far better.
[58]

This failure is, therefore, moderately serious, and should attract a starting point of 50%

of the maximum penalty; that makes a total of $5,000. I reduce that by a further 50% by
reference to the co-operative approach taken by the Bennetts after Ms Belley contacted them.
That leaves a total of $2,500.

16

[59]

After step two has been applied, that leaves a total potential penalty of $97,500.

Step three
[60]

The Authority is now to consider the means and ability of the person in breach to pay

the penalty reached under step 2. There may be downward adjustment if evidence establishes
real financial or other hardship.

The consequences for the business and for continued

employment of other employees may be a relevant consideration if these are established to the
Authority’s satisfaction.
[61]

I will not share the details of the financial situation of the Bennetts here, but I note that

they had the means to pay immediately the arrears of pay due to the three employees.
However, it would likely cause hardship for them to also have to pay a penalty of $97,500 in
the near future. I note, though, that the tavern and the business associated with it are up for
sale. The details are publically available on the internet and the sale price sought at the time
of the finalisation of this determination was $875,000 plus GST. Therefore, a substantial sum
will be released to the Bennetts’ trust once the tavern and its business are sold, even if the sale
goes through at a lower price.
[62]

I accept, though, that there is no foreseeable date when that sale may occur, and that it

would be onerous on the Bennetts to force them to reduce the price to achieve a quick sale so
as to have to pay a significant penalty.
[63]

I agree with the applicant that a reduction of 50% is appropriate. That brings the total

down to $48,750.
Step four
[64]

This final step involves the proportionality or totality test, in which the Authority must

consider whether the provisional penalty reached after the first 3 steps is proportionate to the
seriousness of the breaches, and harm occasioned by them. This step is to ensure that the
imposition of a penalty and the amount of it is just in all the circumstances.
[65]

There is no previous post-Preet Authority determination that I have been able to find

which imposed penalties just for ss 16, 28, 63 and 81 of the Holidays Act. The closest matter

17

I could identify was Labour Inspector v Japan Power Ltd2 in which a total of $70,000 was
imposed for 48 breaches of ss 16, 21 and 81 of the Holidays Act. However, the Authority
found a greater degree of intentionality in Japan Power than I have in the current case, and
the workers in the earlier matter were also arguably more vulnerable, in that they were
migrant workers.
[66]

Standing back, and assessing the degree of culpability and the need for deterrence, I

conclude that a penalty in the total sum of $30,000 is appropriate.
[67]

Section 136 of the Act allows the Authority to order that the whole or any part of any

penalty recovered must be paid to any person. During the investigation meeting Ms Tait
suggested that Ms Greenwood, who was underpaid in terms of final holiday pay, but who was
not expressly included in the statement of problem in terms of an application for the payment
of arrears to her, should have part of any penalty imposed directed to her in the same sum as
the arrears. The respondents do not object to this.
[68]

I do not see any impediment to this proposal, which will save the Labour Inspector or

Ms Greenwood having to lodge a separate application. Ms Greenwood is undoubtedly owed
arrears and I agree that it is appropriate to adopt a pragmatic approach in this case.
Interest
[69]

The Labour Inspectorate seeks interest on the sick leave, alternative holiday and

unworked public holiday arrears on behalf of Ms Pont and Ms Karst. Schedule 2 of the Act
provides that, in any matter involving the recovery of any money, the Authority may, if it
thinks fit, order the inclusion, in the sum for which judgment is given, of interest, calculated
in accordance with Schedule 2 of the Interest on Money Claims Act 2016, on the whole or
part of the money for the whole or part of the period between the date when the cause of
action arose and the date of payment in accordance with the determination of the Authority.
[70]

Interest on arrears was sought in the statement of claim but counsel for the applicant

made no substantive submissions except to say that interest was now not sought on the annual
holiday arrears, only on the sick leave, alternative holiday and unworked public holiday
2

[2018] NZERA Christchurch 44

18

arrears. It is not clear to me why this differentiation has been made and, in the absence of a
clear explanation, I decline to award interest.
Orders
[71]

I order the respondents to pay a penalty in the sum of $30,000, $20,371.09 of which is

to be paid to the Authority, which will then be paid by the Authority into a Crown bank
account. The balance of $9,628.91 is to be paid to the Labour Inspectorate, which will take
such steps as it reasonably can to pay to Ms Greenwood. These sums are to be paid by no
later than 4pm on Friday 25 January 2019.
Costs
[72]

Costs are reserved. The parties are to seek to agree how costs are to be dealt with.

However, if they are unable to agree by 4pm on Friday 25 January 2019, the Labour
Inspectorate may lodge and serve a memorandum of counsel setting out what contribution
towards its costs it seeks, and the basis for that contribution, by no later than 4pm on Friday 8
February 2019. The respondents may reply by lodging and serving a memorandum in reply
by no later than 4pm on Friday 22 February 2019. The Authority would then determine costs
on the papers.

David Appleton
Member of the Employment Relations Authority

19

Appendix 1 – Summary of penalty analysis
Step 1 - Nature and number of breaches – potential maximum penalties
Breach of s 16 of the Holidays Act

$120,000

Breach of s 28 of the Holidays Act

$20,000

Breach of s 63 of the Holidays Act

$150,000

Breach of s 81 of the Holidays Act

$10,000
Subtotal

$300,000

Step 2(a) – Seriousness of breaches as a proportion of maxima in step 1
Breach of s 16 of the Holidays Act

50%

$60,000

Breach of s 28 of the Holidays Act

50%

$10,000

Breach of s 63 of the Holidays Act

80%

$120,000

Breach of s 81 of the Holidays Act

50%

$5,000
Subtotal

$195,000

Step 2(b) - Reduction on account of mitigating factors
Breach of s 16 of the Holidays Act

50%

$30,000

Breach of s 28 of the Holidays Act

50%

$5,000

Breach of s 63 of the Holidays Act

50%

$60,000

Breach of s 81 of the Holidays Act

50%

$2,500
Subtotal

$97,500

Subtotal

$48,750

TOTAL

$30,000

Step 3 – Respondents’ financial circumstances
Reduction of 50%
Step 4 - Proportionality

20

